Course Syllabus
Jump to Today
EAS 701: Effective Academic Writing

 

Credit: 1                                                                            Instructor: Dr. Prasenjit Guptasarma

Section: 202                                                                                           pg@uwm.edu

Fall: 2023                                                                      Teacher: Dr. Mohammad Anisur Rahman

                                                                                                               marahman@uwm.edu

                                                                                   

Course Description

Effective Academic Writing is a one-credit mandatory writing course for graduate students in engineering. The course acclimates students with ways in which they can make their writing more effective. For example, students examine the connection between rhetoric and writing, learn techniques summarizing information in an academic context and develop their skills for rhetorical research processes and purposes.

 

Course Objectives

 

Obtaining familiarity and aptitude with academic writing processes
Fostering an understanding of rhetoric and research-based writing
Improving higher order writing skills (such as cohesion and coherence)
Understanding the concept of academic integrity and gain familiarity with correct citations and formatting conventions
 

Required Texts  

 

No textbooks required. Relevant readings, resources and handouts will be uploaded on Canvas.

 

Assignments and Topics

 

This course will take a micro-approach to research writing, focusing on the nuances of the writing process. As a result, you will do rhetorical analysis, write summaries, practice paraphrasing and other writing assignments. Details of each of the assignments will be published on Canvas. General writing and research related topics that this class will cover include: 

 

Rhetoric and Writing
This is the first module where we will talk about how rhetoric and writing are interwoven. Basically, it will be an introduction to any student who may not have had formal introduction to the field of rhetoric and how it improves communication—written and spoken. However, to some of the students, lectures and resources on rhetoric may serve as a refresher as you may have already been familiar with these topics. Please note, we will get to know the basic characteristics and functions of rhetoric under this module while we also discuss rhetorical appeals, and situations. This module also discusses how thinking rhetorically helps better understand the research process.

 

Citation Chasing
For this module, we will go over the “citation chasing”—a technique to find out several relevant sources from one source. Relevant handouts for this topic will be uploaded on Canvas. Initially you will write a reflection on this technique. You will find more information on this module on Canvas.

 

Academic Summary Writing:
This module introduces multiple techniques for writing effective summaries. You will find relevant handouts on the class Canvas site. For assessment, you will write and revise academic summaries of the articles you found for the previous assignment (citation chasing).

 

Paraphrasing
For this module, we will discuss effective paraphrasing techniques. We will do hands-on practice on paraphrasing and may look at some syntactical structures for this module.

 

Citation and Formatting, Academic Integrity, & Issue of Plagiarism
Though highly undesirable, plagiarism may happen at any level of education. Also, it may happen when someone does not understand the importance and value of citations. Keeping these points in mind primarily, we will discuss different citations and formatting conventions like APA and MLA for this module. We will focus especially on Numeric Citation Style since in engineering, this style is widely followed. We will take advantage of various online resources for this.

 

Research & Rhetorical analysis
Under this module, students will learn about new ways to look at the published research in their fields. They will also write brief rhetorical analysis papers for the scholarly work they read for their disciplines.

 

Procedures & Policies

 

Please read the following policies carefully and reach out if you have questions regarding   any of them.

 

Attendance Policies

 

This course is taught completely online. Pre-recorded PowerPoint lectures will be uploaded on a week by week basis on Canvas. If you have question/s about recorded PPTs, please reach out via email to marahman@uwm.edu .  

 

Lateness Policy & Extensions

 

No late assignments are accepted. However, I do have an extension policy. According to this: you can request an extension on any one Canvas writing assignment except for the Final Project (details to be posted on Canvas). You must email me at least two days before the assignment due date, tell me why you need an extension, and give me your proposed date of submission. I will respond as soon as possible approving your proposed submission date.

 

Participation and Professionalism: Your Online Presence

 

This is a graduate level course. Student participation and communication is essential for this class to function up to expectations. It is also important that you write clearly and convey meanings that you intend, as there are no face-to-face clues in an online course. Please remember to maintain etiquette in email and other electronic forms of communication are a significant part of your professionalism.

 

Workload

 

This is a 1-credit course. I expect you to spend 1-2 hours outside of class for the hour in class. Since our sessions are 50-minutes long, you can expect to spend 2 hours (approx.) each week preparing for class or working on assignments.  

 

Communication

 

For course-related questions—such as lectures, assignment prompts, etc., I suggest you communicate with me (marahman@uwm.edu) since I’d conduct these activities. However, please feel free to communicate with Dr. Prasenjit Guptasarma (pg@uwm.edu) –the official instructor of record for this class if you prefer so.

 

Academic Honesty  

 

You are responsible for honest completion of your work, appropriate citation of sources, and respect for others’ academic endeavors. Please do your own work, don't copy anyone else’s, and don't plagiarize. Plagiarism is not tolerated at this university or in the professional world.

When quoting or paraphrasing authors other than your textbook authors in any of your assignments, you must provide correct documentation in the form of in-text citations and a Works Cited or References page. If material is plagiarized, it will result in either a zero on the assignment or a failing grade in the course. As stated earlier in this document, submission of an assignment in Canvas means that you are claiming it to be solely your own original work, with the exception of material for which you provide appropriate citations/references for quotes and paraphrasing.

 

Important Syllabus Links: 

University Writing Center: An Excellent resource for your writing needs. You can make online appointments, too. For more info: https://uwm.edu/writing-center/ Links to an external site.
Links to an external site.Links to an external site.
Religious observances. Accommodations for absences due to religious observance should
be noted. https://uwm.edu/studentinvolvement/more/spiritual-religious/observances/ Links to an external site.

Links to an external site.Links to an external site.

Students called to active military duty. Accommodations for absences due to call-up of
reserves to active military duty should be noted.

Students: https://uwm.edu/onestop/students-called-to-active-duty/ Links to an external site.

Links to an external site.Links to an external site.

Employees: https://www.wisconsin.edu/ohrwd/download/policies/ops/bn9.pdf

(Editorially Revised, 03/25/09)

(Editorially Revised, 12/06/2016)

Students with disabilities. Notice to these students should appear prominently in the
syllabus so that special accommodations are provided in a timely manner.

http://uwm.edu/arc/ (Links to an external site.) Links to an external site.

Links to an external site.Links to an external site.

Incompletes. A notation of "incomplete" may be given in lieu of a final grade to a student
who has carried a subject successfully until the end of a semester but who, because of

illness or other unusual and substantiated cause beyond the student's control, has been

unable to take or complete the final examination or to complete some limited amount of

term work. https://uwm.edu/secu/wp-content/uploads/sites/122/2019/04/S-31-INCOMPLETE-GRADES-Clean.pdf Links to an external site.

Links to an external site.Links to an external site.

Discriminatory conduct (such as sexual harassment). Discriminatory conduct will not be
tolerated by the University. It poisons the work and learning environment of the University

and threatens the careers, educational experience, and well-being of students, faculty, and

staff. https://uwm.edu/equity-diversity-services/policies/discriminatory-conduct-policy/ Links to an external site.

Links to an external site.Links to an external site.

Academic misconduct. Cheating on exams or plagiarism are violations of the academic
honor code and carry severe sanctions, including failing a course or even suspension or

dismissal from the University. https://uwm.edu/deanofstudents/academic-misconduct-2/ Links to an external site.

Links to an external site.Links to an external site.

Complaint procedures. Students may direct complaints to the head of the academic unit or
department in which the complaint occurs. If the complaint allegedly violates a specific

university policy, it may be directed to the head of the department or academic unit in

which the complaint occurred or to the appropriate university office responsible for

enforcing the policy. https://uwm.edu/complaints-grievances/ Links to an external site.

Links to an external site.Links to an external site.

Grade appeal procedures. A student may appeal a grade on the grounds that it is based on
a capricious or arbitrary decision of the course instructor. Such an appeal shall follow the

established procedures adopted by the department, college, or school in which the course

resides or in the case of graduate students, the Graduate School. These procedures are

available in writing from the respective department chairperson or the Academic Dean of

the College/School. https://uwm.edu/engineering/students/current/student-academic-appeal-procedures/ Links to an external site.

Links to an external site.Links to an external site.

LGBT+ resources. Faculty and staff can find resources to support inclusivity of students who identify as LGBT+ in the learning environment. http://uwm.edu/lgbtrc/ (Links to an external site.) Links to an external site.
Links to an external site.Links to an external site.
Other: The final exam requirement, the final exam date requirement, etc. https://uwm.edu/onestop/enrolling/final-exam-schedule/ Links to an external site.
Course Summary:
Date	Details	Due
Fri Sep 15, 2023	Discussion Topic Introduction	due by 11:59pm
Fri Sep 22, 2023	Assignment Rhetoric Reflection (Assignment 1)	due by 11:59pm
Fri Sep 29, 2023	Assignment Assignment on Rhetorical Analysis 1	due by 11:59pm
Fri Oct 6, 2023	Assignment Rhetorical Analysis (Rhetorical Situation) Paper 2	due by 11:59pm
Fri Oct 13, 2023	Assignment Paraphrasing Assignment	due by 11:59pm
Fri Oct 20, 2023	Assignment Academic Summary	due by 11:59pm
Sun Oct 29, 2023	Assignment Academic Summary Revision	due by 11:59pm
Sun Nov 5, 2023	Assignment Assignment: Reflection on Citation Chasing	due by 11:59pm